---
layout: post
title: cgi 
tags: [cgi, common gateway interface, webserver]
---

Last week at the Dutch PHP Conference (DPC) i joined a talk about webservers and related tech.
During the talk the wellknown Common Gateway Interface (CGI) protocol came up and once back home i decided to refresh my knowledge.

So basically a webserver is a process which has the responsibility to transform an incoming HTTP request into a response. 
How this tranformation is done is totally up to the webserver.
It can serve static files, call some executable or perhaps even attach a monkey through a [brain-computer interface][1] to generate some arbitrary response.

In the (very) early days the web consisted mainly of static pages and with the growth of the internet the dynamic web pages took over.
Dynamic pages are often realized with server-side scripting. Typical languages used for server-side scripting are: PHP, Perl, ASP.NET and JSP.

A webserver, like any other process, has three [filedescriptors][4] attached namely **stdin** (fd 0), **stdout** (fd: 1) and **stderr** (fd: 2).
Exceptions to this are probably daemons where this isnt very useful since they are running in the background.
When a parent process spawns a child process, the child process will inherit the [standard streams][5] of its parent process.
In addition to the standard streams each process has access to [environmental variables][6] which again are inherited (copied) from the parent process.

Now CGI is nothing more then a set of conventions about how to exchange data between the webserver and an executable (script) to handle the request and generate a response.  
It all boils down to this:  
- parameters sent with HTTP GET are stored in the `QUERY_STRING` environment variable (named meta-variables in the rfc)  
- parameters sent with HTTP POST request are passed to **stdin** of the script  
- the scripts response is directed to the scripts **stdout**  

During a CGI transaction meta-variables are extracted from the identically named environmental variables and passed on to the CGI script.
These meta-variables are:

**Server specific variables**  
- `SERVER_SOFTWARE` Webserver vendor (e.g. Apache)  
- `SERVER_NAME`  Hostname of the server  
- `GATEWAY_INTERFACE` : CGI/version  

**Request specific variables**  
- `SERVER_PROTOCOL` : HTTP/version (e.g. HTTP/1.1)  
- `SERVER_PORT` : TCP/IP port number on which the client request was received by the webserver  
- `REQUEST_METHOD` : GET/POST/PUT/DELETE ...  
- `PATH_INFO` : The path *after* the script file (e.g. for http://domain.com/index.php/some/path?foo=bar PATH_INFO will be **/some/path**)  
- `PATH_TRANSLATED`  
- `SCRIPT_NAME`: Relative path to the script
- `QUERY_STRING` : All parameters from the URI after the "?" character  
- `REMOTE_HOST` : Hostname of the client  
- `REMOTE_ADDR` : IP address of the client (caution: or reverse proxy if present)  
- `AUTH_TYPE` : None, Basic, Digest or other  
- `REMOTE_USER` :  User identification string used by some AUTH_TYPE's  
- `REMOTE_IDENT`  May provide identity information (see [ident protocol][7] for details)
- `CONTENT_TYPE` : Media type of the message body (if any) attached to the request
- `CONTENT_LENGTH` : Size of the message body attached to the request in decimal octets  
- `HTTP_*` : Any header field from the clients request where characters are converted to upper case, occurences of "-" (dash) are replaced by "\_" (underscore) and prepended by "HTTP_"

Sources:  
- [Wikipedia CGI][2]  
- [ietf.org CGI rfc][3]  
- [File descriptors][4]  
- [Standard streams][5]  
- [Linux Environment Variables][6]  

[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brain%E2%80%93computer_interface
[2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Common_Gateway_Interface
[3]: http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3875
[4]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File_descriptor
[5]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_streams
[6]: https://help.ubuntu.com/community/EnvironmentVariables
[7]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ident_protocol
