---
layout: post
title: man bash
tags: [linux, bash]
---

So today I decided to read the bash manual `$ man bash` to see if there was anything new I could learn.
This post can be seen as a summary of things i did not yet knew or found interesting enough to write about for future reference.

## Invocation
Typical bash invocation looks something like:

`$ bash [long options] [options] [--] [arguments ...]`

- long options start with -- (double dashes) and *must* precede any used short option(s)
- (short) options start with a single - (single dash)
- The -- signals the end of options and disables further option processing
- arguments can be a file 

## Login shell, interactive shell, non-interactive shell
A login shell is simply a shell that was told to be a login shell.
It does not mean a shell that pops up after you login, though usually application that logs you in is telling shell it launches to be a login shell.
A login shell can be started with various `$ bash -l` or `$ bash --login` or `$ exec -l bash `.

A way to check if the current shell is a login shell is by executing `$ echo $0`.  
If the output is `-bash` (mention it starts with a dash) it is a login shell, if it is just `bash` it is a non-login shell.

An interactive shell is one started *without* non-option arguments (read: without a file argument). It reads commands from user input on a tty. Among other things, such a shell reads startup files on activation, displays a prompt, and enables job control by default. The user can *interact* with the shell.
So a shell running a script is always a non-interactive shell.  
A way to check if the current shell is an interactive shell is by checking the value of the **$PS1** variable.

> // in a interactive shell  
> $ echo $PS1  
> [\u@\h \W]\$  
>  
> // in a non-interactive shell  
> $ echo $PS1  
> *yields no result*

Another way would be to check if the variable **$-** (which contains the current set of options) contains the "i" character.

```bash
case $- in
*i*)    # interactive shell
;;
*)      # non-interactive shell
;;
```

So why does this all matter?  
Well... these different types of shells load various configuration files.

Login shells load:

1) /etc/profile  
2) /etc/profile.d/* (load all scripts inside this directory)  
3) ~/.bash_profile, ~/.bash_login or ~/.profile (whichever it finds *first* in this order)  
4) ~/.bash_logout (called upon logout)

Interactive shells load:

1) ~/.bashrc

## Pipeline
A normal pipeline takes the form of `$ command1 | command2` where the standard out of command1 if fed to the standard in of command2.  
If **|&** is used the standard error of command1 is connected to the standard input of command2 through the pipe.

`$ command1 |& command2` equals `$ command1 2>&1 | command2`

This implicit redirection (by |&) of the standard error is performed *after* any redirections specified by the command.  
So for example when executing the command `$ cd unknown_dir 2> errorfile |& cat` will result in an empty *errorfile* since the defined redirection of standard error to the *errorfile* is overwritten by |& .



